 The meaning of computer security
The meaning of the term computer security has evolved in recent years. Before the problem 
of data security became widely publicized in the media, most people’s idea of computer 
security focused on the physical machine. Traditionally, computer facilities have been 
physically protected for three reasons: 
 To prevent theft of or damage to the hardware
 To prevent theft of or damage to the information
 To prevent disruption of service
Computer security is security applied to computing devices such as 
computers and smartphones, as well as computer networkssuch as private and public 
networks, including the whole Internet. The field covers all the processes and mechanisms by 
which digital equipment, information and services are protected from unintended or 
unauthorized access, change or destruction, and are of growing importance in line with the 
increasing reliance on computer systems of most societies worldwide. It includes physical 
security to prevent theft of equipment, and information security to protect the data on that 
equipment. It is sometimes referred to as "cyber security" or "IT security", though these terms 
generally do not refer to physical security (locks and such).
Some important terms used in computer security are:
Vulnerability
Vulnerability is a weakness which allows an attacker to reduce a system's information 
assurance. Vulnerability is the intersection of three elements: a system susceptibility or flaw, 
attacker access to the flaw, and attacker capability to exploit the flaw. To exploit 
vulnerability, an attacker must have at least one applicable tool or technique that can connect 
to a system weakness. In this frame, vulnerability is also known as the attack surface.
Vulnerability management is the cyclical practice of identifying, classifying, remediating, 
and mitigating vulnerabilities.This practice generally refers to software vulnerabilities in 
computing systems.
Backdoors
A backdoor in a computer system, is a method of bypassing normal authentication, securing 
remote access to a computer, obtaining access to plaintext, and so on, while attempting to 
remain undetected. The backdoor may take the form of an installed program (e.g., Back Orifice), or could be a 
modification to an existing program or hardware device. It may also fake information about 
disk and memory usage.
Denial-of-service attack
Unlike other exploits, denials of service attacks are not used to gain unauthorized access or 
control of a system. They are instead designed to render it unusable. Attackers can deny 
service to individual victims, such as by deliberately entering a wrong password enough 
consecutive times to cause the victim account to be locked, or they may overload the 
capabilities of a machine or network and block all users at once. These types of attack are, in 
practice, very hard to prevent, because the behaviour of whole networks needs to be 
analyzed, not only the behaviour of small pieces of code. Distributed denial of 
service (DDoS) attacks are common, where a large number of compromised hosts 
(commonly referred to as "zombie computers", used as part of a botnet with, for example; 
a worm, trojan horse, or backdoor exploit to control them) are used to flood a target system 
with network requests, thus attempting to render it unusable through resource exhaustion. 
Direct-access attacks
An unauthorized user gaining physical access to a computer (or part thereof) can perform 
many functions, install different types of devices to compromise security, including operating 
system modifications, software worms, key loggers, and covert listening devices. The 
attacker can also easily download large quantities of data onto backup media, for 
instance CD-R/DVD-R, tape; or portable devices such as key drives, digital 
cameras or digital audio players. Another common technique is to boot an operating system 
contained on a CD-ROM or other bootable media and read the data from the hard drive(s) 
this way. The only way to defeat this is to encrypt the storage media and store the key 
separate from the system. Direct-access attacks are the only type of threat 
to Standalone computers (never connect to internet), in most cases.
Eavesdropping
Eavesdropping is the act of surreptitiously listening to a private conversation, typically 
between hosts on a network. For instance, programs such as Carnivore and NarusInsight have 
been used by the FBI and NSA to eavesdrop on the systems of internet service providers. 
Spoofing
Spoofing of user identity describes a situation in which one person or program successfully 
masquerades as another by falsifying data and thereby gaining an illegitimate advantage.
Tampering
Tampering describes an intentional modification of products in a way that would make them 
harmful to the consumer.
Repudiation
Repudiation describes a situation where the authenticity of a signature is being challenged.Information disclosure
Information Disclosure (Privacy breach or Data leak) describes a situation where information, 
thought as secure, is released in an untrusted environment.
Elevation of privilege
Elevation of Privilege describes a situation where a person or a program want to gain 
elevated privileges or access to resources that are normally restricted to him/it. 
Exploits
An exploit is a piece of software, a chunk of data, or sequence of commands that takes 
advantage of a software "bug" or "glitch" in order to cause unintended or unanticipated 
behaviour to occur on computer software, hardware, or something electronic (usually 
computerized). This frequently includes such things as gaining control of a computer system 
or allowing privilege escalation or a denial of service attack. The term "exploit" generally 
refers to small programs designed to take advantage of a software flaw that has been 
discovered, either remote or local. The code from the exploit program is frequently reused 
in Trojan horses and computer viruses. 
Indirect attacks
An indirect attack is an attack launched by a third-party computer. By using someone else's 
computer to launch an attack, it becomes far more difficult to track down the actual attacker. 
There have also been cases where attackers took advantage of public anonymizing systems, 
such as the tor onion router system.
Computer crime: Computer crime refers to any crime that involves a computer and 
a network.
Top 10 Cyber Crime Prevention Tips
1. Use Strong Passwords
Use different user ID / password combinations for different accounts and avoid 
writing them down. Make the passwords more complicated by combining letters, 
numbers, special characters (minimum 10 characters in total) and change them on a 
regular basis.
2. Secure your computer
o Activate your firewall
Firewalls are the first line of cyber defence; they block connections to 
unknown or bogus sites and will keep out some types of viruses and hackers.
o Use anti-virus/malware software
Prevent viruses from infecting your computer by installing and regularly 
updating anti-virus software.
o Block spyware attacks
Prevent spyware from infiltrating your computer by installing and updating 
anti-spyware software.3. Be Social-Media Savvy
Make sure your social networking profiles (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, MSN, 
etc.) are set to private. Check your security settings. Be careful what information you 
post online. Once it is on the Internet, it is there forever!
4. Secure your Mobile Devices
Be aware that your mobile device is vulnerable to viruses and hackers. Download 
applications from trusted sources.
5. Install the latest operating system updates
Keep your applications and operating system (e.g. Windows, Mac, Linux) current 
with the latest system updates. Turn on automatic updates to prevent potential attacks 
on older software.
6. Protect your Data
Use encryption for your most sensitive files such as tax returns or financial records, 
make regular back-ups of all your important data, and store it in another location.
7. Secure your wireless network
Wi-Fi (wireless) networks at home are vulnerable to intrusion if they are not properly 
secured. Review and modify default settings. Public Wi-Fi, a.k.a. “Hot Spots”, are 
also vulnerable. Avoid conducting financial or corporate transactions on these 
networks.
8. Protect your e-identity
Be cautious when giving out personal information such as your name, address, phone 
number or financial information on the Internet. Make sure that websites are secure 
(e.g. when making online purchases) or that you’ve enabled privacy settings (e.g. 
when accessing/using social networking sites).
9. Avoid being scammed
Always think before you click on a link or file of unknown origin. Don’t feel 
pressured by any emails. Check the source of the message. When in doubt, verify the 
source. Never reply to emails that ask you to verify your information or confirm your 
user ID or password. 
10. Call the right person for help
Don’t panic! If you are a victim, if you encounter illegal Internet content (e.g. child 
exploitation) or if you suspect a computer crime, identity theft or a commercial scam, 
report this to your local police. If you need help with maintenance or software 
installation on your computer, consult with your service provider or a certified 
computer technician.
Principle security
There are five principles of security. They are as follows:
 Confidentiality: 
The principle of confidentiality specifies that only the sender and the intended 
recipient should be able to access the content of the message.
 
 
 
A B Integrity:
The confidential information sent by A to B which is accessed by C without the 
permission or knowledge of A and B.
 
 Authentication:
Authentication mechanism helps in establishing proof of identification.
 Non-repudiation:
 Access control:
Access control specifies and control who can access what.
 Availability:
It means that assets are accessible to authorized parties at appropriate times.
Attacks 
We want our security system to make sure that no data are disclosed to unauthorized 
parties.
 Data should not be modified in illegitimate ways
 Legitimate user can access the data
Types of attacks
Attacks are grouped into two types:
 Passive attacks: does not involve any modification to the contents of an original 
message
 Active attacks: the contents of the original message are modified in some ways.
