This article is focused on English-language literature rather than the literature of England, so that it includes
writers from Scotland, Wales, the Crown dependencies, and the whole of Ireland, as well as literature in English
from countries of the former British Empire, including the United States. However, until the early 19th century, it
only deals with the literature of the United Kingdom, the Crown dependencies and Ireland. It does not include
literature written in the other languages of Britain.
The English language has developed over the course of more than 1,400 years. The earliest forms of English, a
set of Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon invaders in the fifth century, are called Old
English. Beowulf is the most famous work in Old English, and has achieved national epic status in England,
despite being set in Scandinavia. However, following the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the written form
of the Anglo-Saxon language became less common. Under the influence of the new aristocracy, French became
the standard language of courts, parliament, and polite society. The English spoken after the Normans came is
known as Middle English. This form of English lasted until the 1470s, when the Chancery Standard (late Middle
English), a London-based form of English, became widespread. Geoffrey Chaucer (1343 – 1400), author of The
Canterbury Tales, was a significant figure in the development of the legitimacy of vernacular Middle English at a
time when the dominant literary languages in England were still French and Latin. The invention of the printing
press by Johannes Gutenberg in 1439 also helped to standardise the language, as did the King James Bible
(1611), and the Great Vowel Shift.
Poet and playwright William Shakespeare (1564 – 1616) is widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English
language and one of the world's greatest dramatists. His plays have been translated into every major living
language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright. In the nineteenth century Sir Walter
Scott's historical romances inspired a generation of painters, composers, and writers throughout Europe.
The English language spread throughout the world with the development of the British Empire between the late
16th and early 18th centuries. At its height, it was the largest empire in history. By 1913, the British Empire held
sway over 412 million people, 23% of the world population at the time, During the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries these colonies and the USA started to produce their own significant literary traditions in English. And in
the last hundred plus years numerous writers from Great Britain, both the Republic of Ireland and Northern
Ireland, the USA, and members of other former British colonies have received the Nobel Prize for works in the
English language, more than in any other language.
Old English literature (c. 450–1066)
Old English literature, or Anglo-Saxon literature, encompasses the surviving literature written in Old English in
Anglo-Saxon England, in the period after the settlement of the Saxons and other Germanic tribes in England
(Jutes and the Angles) c. 450, after the withdrawal of the Romans, and "ending soon after the Norman Conquest"
in 1066. These works include genres such as epic poetry, hagiography, sermons, Bible translations, legal works,
chronicles and riddles. In all there are about 400 surviving manuscripts from the period.
Widsith, which appears in the Exeter Book of the late 10th century, gives a list of kings of tribes ordered
according to their popularity and impact on history, with Attila King of the Huns coming first, followed by
Eormanric of the Ostrogoths. It may also be the oldest extant work that tells the Battle of the Goths and Huns,
which is also told in such later Scandinavian works as Hervarar's saga and Gesta Danorum. Lotte Hedeager
argues that the work is far older, however, and that it likely dates back to the late 6th or early 7th century, citing
the author's knowledge of historical details and accuracy as proof of its authenticity. She does note, however,
that some authors, such as John Niles, have argued the work was invented in the 10th century.
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is a collection of annals in Old English, from the 9th century, that chronicles the
history of the Anglo-Saxons. The poem Battle of Maldon also deals with history. This is a work of uncertain date,
celebrating the Battle of Maldon of 991, at which the Anglo-Saxons failed to prevent a Viking invasion.
Oral tradition was very strong in early English culture and most literary works were written to be performed. Epic
poems were very popular, and some, including Beowulf, have survived to the present day. Beowulf is the mostfamous work in Old English, and has achieved national epic status in England, despite being set in Scandinavia.
The only surviving manuscript is the Nowell Codex, the precise date of which is debated, but most estimates
place it close to the year 1000. Beowulf is the conventional title, and its composition is dated between the 8th and
the early 11th century.
Nearly all Anglo-Saxon authors are anonymous: twelve are known by name from medieval sources, but only four
of those are known by their vernacular works with any certainty: Cædmon, Bede, Alfred the Great, and Cynewulf.
Cædmon is the earliest English poet whose name is known, and his only known surviving work Cædmon's Hymn
probably dates from the late 7th century. The poem is one of the earliest attested examples of Old English and
is, with the runic Ruthwell Cross and Franks Casket inscriptions, one of three candidates for the earliest attested
example of Old English poetry. It is also one of the earliest recorded examples of sustained poetry in a
Germanic language. The poem, The Dream of the Rood, was inscribed upon the Ruthwell Cross.
Two Old English poems from the late 10th century are The Wanderer and The Seafarer. Both have a religious
theme, and Richard Marsden describes The Seafarer as "an exhortatory and didactic poem, in which the
miseries of winter seafaring are used as a metaphor for the challenge faced by the committed Christian […]".
Classical antiquity was not forgotten in Anglo-Saxon England, and several Old English poems are adaptations of
late classical philosophical texts. The longest is King Alfred's (849–899) 9th-century translation of Boethius'
Consolation of Philosophy.
Middle English literature (1066–1500)
After the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the written form of the Anglo-Saxon language became less
common. Under the influence of the new aristocracy, French became the standard language of courts,
parliament, and polite society. As the invaders integrated, their language and literature mingled with that of the
natives, and the Norman dialects of the ruling classes became Anglo-Norman. From then until the 12th century,
Anglo-Saxon underwent a gradual transition into Middle English. Political power was no longer in English hands,
so that the West Saxon literary language had no more influence than any other dialect and Middle English
literature was written in many dialects that corresponded to the region, history, culture, and background of
individual writers.
In this period religious literature continued to enjoy popularity and Hagiographies were written, adapted and
translated: for example, The Life of Saint Audrey, Eadmer's (c. 1060 – c. 1126). At the end of the 12th century,
Layamon in Brut adapted the Norman-French of Wace to produce the first English-language work to present the
legends of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table. It was also the first historiography written in English
since the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.
Middle English Bible translations, notably Wycliffe's Bible, helped to establish English as a literary language.
Wycliffe's Bible is the name now given to a group of Bible translations into Middle English that were made under
the direction of, or at the instigation of, John Wycliffe. They appeared between about 1382 and 1395. These Bible
translations were the chief inspiration and cause of the Lollard movement, a pre-Reformation movement that
rejected many of the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church.
Another literary genre, that of Romances, appears in English from the 13th century, with King Horn and Havelock
the Dane, based on Anglo-Norman originals such as the Romance of Horn (c. 1170), but it was in the 14th
century that major writers in English first appeared. These were William Langland, Geoffrey Chaucer and the socalled Pearl Poet, whose most famous work is Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.
Langland's Piers Plowman (written c. 1360–87) or Visio Willelmi de Petro Plowman (William's Vision of Piers
Plowman) is a Middle English allegorical narrative poem, written in unrhymed alliterative verse.
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight is a late 14th-century Middle English alliterative romance. It is one of the betterknown Arthurian stories of an established type known as the "beheading game". Developing from Welsh, Irish
and English tradition, Sir Gawain highlights the importance of honour and chivalry. Preserved in the same
manuscript with Sir Gawayne were three other poems, now generally accepted as the work of the same author,
including an intricate elegiac poem, Pearl. The English dialect of these poems from the Midlands is markedly
different from that of the London-based Chaucer and, though influenced by French in the scenes at court in Sir
Gawain, there are in the poems also many dialect words, often of Scandinavian origin, that belonged to
northwest England.Middle English lasted until the 1470s, when the Chancery Standard, a London-based form of English, became
widespread and the printing press started to standardise the language. Chaucer is best known today for The
Canterbury Tales. This is a collection of stories written in Middle English (mostly in verse although some are in
prose), that are presented as part of a story-telling contest by a group of pilgrims as they travel together from
Southwark to the shrine of St Thomas Becket at Canterbury Cathedral. Chaucer is a significant figure in the
development of the legitimacy of the vernacular, Middle English, at a time when the dominant literary languages
in England were still French and Latin.
At this time, literature in England was being written in various languages, including Latin, Norman-French, and
English: the multilingual nature of the audience for literature in the 14th century is illustrated by the example of
John Gower (c. 1330–1408). A contemporary of William Langland and a personal friend of Chaucer, Gower is
remembered primarily for three major works: the Mirroir de l'Omme, Vox Clamantis, and Confessio Amantis,
three long poems written in Anglo-Norman, Latin and Middle English respectively, which are united by common
moral and political themes.
Significant religious works were also created in the 14th century, including those of Julian of Norwich (c. 1342 –
c. 1416) and Richard Rolle. Julian's Revelations of Divine Love (about 1393) is believed to be the first published
book written by a woman in the English language.
A major work from the 15th century is Le Morte d'Arthur by Sir Thomas Malory, which was printed by Caxton in
1485. This is a compilation of some French and English Arthurian romances, and was among the earliest books
printed in England. It was popular and influential in the later revival of interest in the Arthurian legends.
Medieval theatre
In the Middle Ages, drama in the vernacular languages of Europe may have emerged from enactments of the
liturgy. Mystery plays were presented in the porches of cathedrals or by strolling players on feast days. Miracle
and mystery plays, along with morality plays (or "interludes"), later evolved into more elaborate forms of drama,
such as was seen on the Elizabethan stages. Another form of medieval theatre was the mummers' plays, a form
of early street theatre associated with the Morris dance, concentrating on themes such as Saint George and the
Dragon and Robin Hood. These were folk tales re-telling old stories, and the actors travelled from town to town
performing these for their audiences in return for money and hospitality.
Mystery plays and miracle plays are among the earliest formally developed plays in medieval Europe. Medieval
mystery plays focused on the representation of Bible stories in churches as tableaux with accompanying
antiphonal song. They developed from the 10th to the 16th century, reaching the height of their popularity in the
15th century before being rendered obsolete by the rise of professional theatre.
There are four complete or nearly complete extant English biblical collections of plays from the late medieval
period. The most complete is the York cycle of 48 pageants. They were performed in the city of York, from the
middle of the 14th century until 1569. Besides the Middle English drama, there are three surviving plays in
Cornish known as the Ordinalia.
Having grown out of the religiously based mystery plays of the Middle Ages, the morality play is a genre of
medieval and early Tudor theatrical entertainment, which represented a shift towards a more secular base for
European theatre. Morality plays are a type of allegory in which the protagonist is met by personifications of
various moral attributes who try to prompt him to choose a godly life over one of evil. The plays were most
popular in Europe during the 15th and 16th centuries.
The Somonyng of Everyman (The Summoning of Everyman) (c. 1509–1519), usually referred to simply as
Everyman, is a late 15th-century English morality play. Like John Bunyan's allegory Pilgrim's Progress (1678),
Everyman examines the question of Christian salvation through the use of allegorical characters.
English Renaissance (1500–1660)
Renaissance style and ideas were slow to penetrate England and the Elizabethan era (1558–1603) is usually
regarded as the height of the English Renaissance. However, many scholars see its beginnings in the early
1500s during the reign of Henry VIII.
After William Caxton introduced the printing press in England in 1476, vernacular literature flourished. TheReformation inspired the production of vernacular liturgy which led to the Book of Common Prayer (1549), a
lasting influence on literary language. The English Renaissance was a cultural and artistic movement in England
dating from the late 15th to the 17th century. It is associated with the pan-European Renaissance that is usually
regarded as beginning in Italy in the late 14th century. Like most of northern Europe, England saw little of these
developments until more than a century later. Renaissance style and ideas were slow in penetrating England,
and the Elizabethan era in the second half of the 16th century is usually regarded as the height of the English
Renaissance.
This Italian influence can also be found in the poetry of Thomas Wyatt (1503–1542), one of the earliest English
Renaissance poets. He was responsible for many innovations in English poetry, and alongside Henry Howard,
Earl of Surrey (1516/1517–1547) introduced the sonnet from Italy into England in the early 16th century.